What is a Miracle?

A miracle is a correction. It does not create, nor really change at all. It merely
looks on devastation, and reminds the mind that what it sees is false. It undoes
error, but does not attempt to go beyond perception, nor exceed the function of
forgiveness. Thus it stays within time’s limits. Yet it paves the way for the return of
timelessness and love’s awakening, for fear must slip away under the gentle remedy
it brings. (W-pII.13.1:1-6)
The miraclecorrects; it does notcreate. It does not make anything new; it merely adjusts a mistaken assessment of
what already is. As Lesson 341 says, we already are sinless. We do not need to become sinless. All that we need to
do is to end our attack on our own sinlessness.
We think of a miracle as some amazing change in the way things are. But a miracle, as the Course sees it, changes
nothing. It simply takes away a false perception. It removes the veneer of sin and guilt we have laid over our
innocence, and reveals the unchanging innocence we have attempted to hide.
A miracle often has external effects, although not always:
Miracles are expressions of love, but they may not always have observable effects.
(T-1.I.35:1)
When there are such effects, something in the illusion seems to change, often drastically. Someone who was sick
gets well. Two people who were at war suddenly make peace. Yet that is theeffect of the miracle, not the miracle
itself. The effect simply reveals in form what has always been true in reality—the “sick” person was always whole,
the “warring” friends were always joined as one mind. The observable effect shows us that the form was never real
in the first place; but the miracle is the perception thatsaw that before it was an observable effect, and by realizing
the falsity of the illusion, changed the illusion.
It [a miracle] merely looks on devastation, and reminds the mind that what it sees is
false. (1:3)
The miracle looks on the illusion, and reminds the mind that itis illusion. We do see “devastation” in this world,
but the miracle reminds us that what we see is false. We see a person’s mind twisted with guilt; the miracle
reminds us that the guilt is as unreal as its apparent effects, and enables us to see the person’s wholeness and
innocence behind the illusion they present to the world.
It [a miracle] undoes error, but does not attempt to go beyond perception, nor
exceed the function of forgiveness. (1:4)
A miracle relates to perception, and not to direct revelation. It causes a change in my perception, undoing my
perceptual errors.
Wholeness is the perceptual content of miracles. They thus correct, or atone for,
the faulty perception of lack. (T-1.I.41:1–2)
When my mind experiences a miracle, I see wholeness instead of lack. In regard to “sin,” which is a perception of
lack of love in someone, the miracle causes me to see their love instead of their “sin.” I see them as whole, rather
than as lacking. The miracle undoes my error, but it does not attempt to go beyond that. Miracles occur within the
context of perception and of time; they do not try to carry me to the realm of knowledge and of eternity. They
correct my perception but they do not give knowledge. “Thus it stays within time’s limits” (1:5).
The Course makes this point repeatedly; it must be important. What makes it so important to us? This: When we
turn to a spiritual path, we can become overanxious. We want a miracle to translate us immediately into the realm
of pure spirit. We want a quick fix. But we cannot make a transition directly from false perception to pure
knowledge. We have to go through the stage of corrected perception. We can’t skip steps. The Text says it
clearly: “Perception must be straightened out before you can know anything” (T-3.III.1:2). That is what miracles
are for: correcting our perception. Once our perception is corrected, God can take us the rest of the way, from
perception to knowledge.
– 209 –
--- PAGE 210 ---
Redeemed perception is easily translated into knowledge, for only perception is
capable of error and perception has never been. Being corrected it gives place to
knowledge, which is forever the only reality. (T-12.VIII.8:6–7)
Yet it [the miracle] paves the way for the return of timelessness and love’s
awakening, for fear must slip away under the gentle remedy it brings. (1:6)
The “gentle remedy” of the miracle, in correcting our perception, “paves the way” for a return to full knowledge.
Without the undoing of our false perception, we will resist knowledge and reject love; we will be afraid of it. Our
twisted perception of love, for instance, believes that love means sacrifice, and that total love would mean total
sacrifice. We therefore run away from it; we fear it. Such perceptions need to be changed before we would even
be willing to let real love awaken within us. Because the miracle removes our fear, it opens the way for love. It
ends our resistance; it removes the interference.

A miracle contains the gift of grace, for it is given and received as one. And thus it
illustrates the law of truth the world does not obey, because it fails entirely to
understand its ways. A miracle inverts perception which was upside down before,
and thus it ends the strange distortions that were manifest. Now is perception open
to the truth. Now is forgiveness seen as justified. (W-pII.13.2:1-5)
One of the most frequently repeated lessons of the entire Course is that giving and receiving are the same: “To give
and to receive are one in truth” (W-pII.108.Heading). This lesson, one of the most basic the Holy Spirit wants to
teach us (it is the first lesson of the Holy Spirit in Chapter 6: “To have, give all to all”—T-6.V(A).5:13), is also one
of the hardest for us to learn because it is the antithesis of our normal way of thinking.
A miracle contains the gift of grace, for it is given and received as one. (2:1)
To receive a miracle, we must give it; to give it, we must receive it. Receiving a miracle and giving a miracle are
one thing, not two. Many of us get wrapped up in trying to figure out whether I must forgive myself first to forgive
someone else, or whether I have to forgive the other person before I can forgive myself. The answer is, neither and
both. To forgive yourself you must forgive the other person, but to forgive the other person, you must forgive
yourself. They are one. They seem to be two distinct actions but they are not; they are one action because my
brother and I are one Self. It may often seem, within time, that one precedes the other, but in reality, both happen
simultaneously.
“And thus it illustrates the law of truth the world does not obey, because it fails entirely to understand its ways”
(2:2). The “law of truth” is, I think, the same as the “law of love” mentioned in the title of Lesson 344: “What I give
my brother is my gift to me.” Were we to completely appropriate this one thought, we would be out of here, done
with the curriculum. A miracle illustrates this law; it gives a pictorial representation of it, a demonstration of it.
When I give a miracle to a brother, I am looking on his devastation and realizing that what I see is false (1:3). I am
seeing his wholeness rather than the illusion of his lack. My seeing that for someone else reminds them to see it for
themselves, if they wish to. And when they receive the miracle, I am blessed. I am reminded of who I am.
The world does not obey this law, nor understand it. Unlearning the world’s way of thinking about this is what the
Course calls “undoing the getting concept” (T-6.V(B).3:1). It calls this the first step in the reversal of our ego’s
thinking. Miracles are important to us because they illustrate this law; they help us know, by experience, that
giving is receiving; that I keep what I want by giving it away.
So the perceptions we have learned from the ego are upside down; a miracle inverts those perceptions and makes
them right-side up again. Perhaps this is a reference to th