What is Creation?

Creation is the sum of all God”s Thoughts, in number infinite, and everywhere
without all limit. Only Love creates, and only like Itself. There was no time when
all that It created was not there. Nor will there be a time when anything that it
created suffers any loss. Forever and forever are God’s Thoughts exactly as they
were and as they are, unchanged through time and after time is done. (W-
pII.11.1:1-5)
The question itself is one that often comes up for Course students. The Course speaks often of “your creations,”
and yet never seems to clearly say exactly what those creations are. It tells us that our creation process continues
unabated despite our unawareness of our creations, and that they are all saved for us by the Holy Spirit. There is an
image of us entering Heaven and being greeted by all our creations, as if they were living beings.
We have a fundamental misconception that makes it difficult for us to understand what creations are. For instance,
we think God created this world. When we think of creation, therefore, we think of something physical and
material. We think our creations must be something in this world. Yet the Course clearly tells us this entire world
is an illusion, a miscreation of our mind. How could our creations be here?
My creations, then, cannot be something like a book I write, a relationship I form, a family, or a business. My
creations are not objects at all. They must be thoughts.
Creation is the sum of all God’s Thoughts, in number infinite, and everywhere
without all limit. (1:1)
“Thoughts” is capitalized, so we know this refers to God’s Son. The Christ. Again, we are not used to equating
thoughts and living beings. We do not think of thoughts as beings who are alive; we do not think of living beings as
“only” thoughts. The Course teaches us that we are only Thoughts in God’s Mind. We automatically assume some
kind of material existence when we think of a living being. The Course, all through, is trying to teach us that living
beings are indeed thoughts, or spirits, and not material at all. “You are not a body” (W-pI.91.5:2), means more
than just an admonition not to be limited by our body; it means that we are something wholly other than material.
The essential part of us is not material at all. We are spirit. We are thought.
Only Love creates, and only like itself. (1:2)
From just this much it should be clear that “creations” are “thoughts of love.” If only Love creates, creations must
be the effects of Love. If creations are thoughts, then they must be thoughts of love.
“Only Love creates, and only like itself.” Love always creates more love. Creation, it seems to me, is a circular
thing, like a self-sustaining energy field, each part of which is upholding the other part, an endless cycle of
creation.
The Text teaches us that God, being Love, has no need except to extend Himself. Since we are extensions of His
Being, we have a similar unique need: “With love in you, you have no need except to extend it” (T-15.V.11:3).
Like your Father, you are an idea. And like Him, you can give yourself completely,
wholly without loss and only with gain. (T-15.VI.4:5–6)
This is what we learn through the experience of a holy instant. We are Thoughts of Love, with no need except to
extend love. In our relationships, we are learning to let go of our imagined “personal” needs, and to dedicate our
relationships to “the only need the Sons of God share equally” (T-15.VI.6:10)—the extension of love. Through this
reflection of love here on earth, we learn to take our place again in the eternal creation of Heaven.
It is very difficult, if not impossible, for our minds to comprehend something that isoutside of time. We can
conceive of the idea, but to actually conceptualize it or to feel it is beyond minds that think solely in terms of time.
The creations of Love are beyond time; they have always been, and they always will be. There is no before or after
with Love and Its creations; it is an eternal now.
We think of creation as bringing into existence something that never was. But the Course’s conception of creation
is something that is always complete, and that always existsnow. All of creation has always been there, and always
will be, and yet creation is continuous. Creation is a constant upsurge of beingness, never less, never more, never
old, and always fresh. “Forever and forever are God’s Thoughts exactly as they were and as they are, unchanged
through time and after time is done” (1:5).
– 177 –
--- PAGE 178 ---
God’s creations are unaffected by time. Time is part of our illusion, a way of making lack seem real by having
things be “in the future,” and not now; or to make loss real by seeing them as “past.” When the lesson speaks of
“God’s Thoughts” it is speaking ofus. “We are creation; we the Sons of God” (4:1). It is saying, in other words, “I
am as God created me” (Lessons 94, 110, 162). You and I are those creations, “unchanged through time and after
time is done.” We are not beings under construction, with our reality still in the future, nor are we beings of
corruption, with our purity past and gone. What we are is now, was before time, and will be when time is done.
What changes is not me. To see ourselves as God’s creations is thus to free ourselves from the tyranny of time.
Father, I seek the peace You gave as mine in my creation. What was given then
must be here now, for my creation was apart from time, and still remains beyond
all change. The peace in which Your Son was born into Your Mind is shining there
unchanged. I am as You created me. (W-pII.230.2:1–4)

God’s Thoughts are given all the power that their own Creator has. For He would
add to Love by its extension. Thus His Son shares in creation, and must therefore
share in power to create. What God has willed to be forever one will still be one
when time is over; and will not be changed throughout the course of time,
remaining as it was before the thought of time began. (W-pII.11.2:1-4)
“God’s Thoughts” refers to us, the Thoughts of God. Creation is “the sum of all God’s Thoughts” (1:1), the sum
total of all beings of all time.
The Course makes an amazing assertion here: “God’s Thoughts are given all the power that their own Creator has”
(2:1). In the Bible it is recorded that Jesus said, toward the end of his life, “All power is given to me in heaven and
in earth” (Mt 28:18). The Course says all power is given to us as the Sonship, not just to Jesus. What this is saying
is that what God can do, we can do. We are simply His extensions. Therefore, as He creates, we create also.
The reason God shares His power with us is that “He would add to Love by its extension” (2:2). In other words,
we have power in order to extend love. One short definition of creation might be the extension of love. But the
form of love we share in this world is not Love’s reality; it is only a reflection of Heaven’s love. Our earthly
experience of love is always in the context of separate beings exchanging love; in Heaven is only the awareness of
perfect oneness. We can only imagine what love is like in that context. We can have glimpses of it in a holy
instant, when the barriers between minds seem to disappear. In that moment, there is an awareness that the other
person is you and you are the other person. You are the love in “you” extending to them; you are the love in “the
other person” extending towards “you”; and you are the love in yourself loving yourself. It can be a disorienting
experience because you literally start to lose track of who you are, in the context of individuals, while
simultaneously you become aware of something much larger and more all-inclusive that is what you really are.
Those experiences are wonderful, and asking for them is not discouraged in the Course. But the main thing to
realize here is that creation, as the Course talks about it, is not an experience on earth; it is an experience in
Heaven. It is something that is