What is the Ego?

The ego is idolatry; the sign of limited and separated self, born in a body, doomed
to suffer and to end its life in death. It is the “will” that sees the Will of God as
enemy, and takes a form in which it is denied. The ego is the “proof” that strength
is weak and love is fearful, life is really death, and what opposes God alone is true.
(W-pII.12.1:1-3)
“The ego is idolatry” (1:1). Idolatry is the worship of an idol, a false god. That is what the ego is; the insane
attempt to make real an identity that is apart from God, and intended to replace Him in our awareness. The ego is
“the sign of limited and separated self, born in a body, doomed to suffer and to end its life in death” (1:1).
Let’s pay attention here. The ego is not some “thing” inside of us, some sort of evil twin, the dark side of our soul.
The egois the whole concept of a separated self that is set apart from “other selves.” Isn’t that exactly what we
think we are? A distinct soul, born in a body, struggling through this life and sure to end this life in death? Doesn’t
that describe what we think we are? In other words, the “me” that I think I am, a thing separate from and different
from you,that is the ego! Changing our self-concept from ego to spirit doesn’t just mean that this separate self,
which was black, becomes white. It means that this separated self is completely replaced by something far more
inclusive, in fact, by something all-inclusive. I cease to be “I” in the way I thought I was.
The ego “is the ‘will’ that sees the Will of God as enemy, and takes a form in which it is denied” (1:2). If what I
think of as “I” is to be separate and independent, it cannot be united with the Will of God. The egomust see God’s
Will as enemy because, to the ego, God is “other,” something different from and separate from itself. Since God is
a very powerful “other,” His Will represents a threat, a challenge to the ego’s “will.” Therefore, the form the “will”
of the ego takes will always be some form of denial of God’s Will. For instance, you know that a child is beginning
to develop a psychological ego when he or she begins to say “no” every time you say “yes” (otherwise known as “the
terrible two’s”). The ego is a big “no” to God and His Will.
This ego is precisely what we arenot. “You are not an ego” (T-14.X.5:5). As we look at what the ego is (or appears
to be), let us not be discouraged or depressed by the picture. What we are looking at is not what we are; in fact, it
is what we are not. This imagined self is the source of all our guilt—and it is unreal, and does not exist.
To find its illusory independence, the ego simply negates God and everything about God. The strength of
innocence, gentleness, and love is seen as “weak” and is shunned. Attack is seen instead as strong. “Standing on
your own feet” and being “independent” is seen as maturity and strength, and union with others and dependence on
God is seen as weakness. The ultimate image of a mighty ego is a lone individual screaming defiance at the entire
universe. The ego cannot see nor understand that this lone, limited, and separated self is the very symbol of
weakness.
In speaking of this choice we have made to become egos (a choice we can realize only in dreams, never in reality),
the Course says:
Here does the Son of God ask not too much, but far too little. He would sacrifice
his own identity with everything, to find a little treasure of his own.
(T-26.VII.11:7–8)
To learn to listen to the Voice for God instead of the ego means far more than just listening to the little angel on
our right shoulder instead of the devil on our left. That concept of things leaves the “me” who listens unchanged,
still the same identity, a separated self. To listen to God instead of the ego means letting go entirely of that “little
treasure of [my] own,” which is my entire conception of what I am as something apart from God, and instead
affirming my “identity with everything” (T-26.VII.11:8).
I was mistaken when I thought I lived apart from God, a separate entity that moved
in isolation, unattached, and housed within a body. Now I know my life is God’s, I
have no other home, and I do not exist apart from Him. He has no Thoughts that
are not part of me, and I have none but those which are of Him.(W-pII.223.1:1–3)

The ego is insane. In fear it stands beyond the Everywhere, apart from All, in
separation from the Infinite. In its insanity it thinks it has become a victor over God
Himself. And in its terrible autonomy it “sees” the Will of God has been destroyed.
– 192 –
--- PAGE 193 ---
It dreams of punishment, and trembles at the figures in its dreams; its enemies,
who seek to murder it before it can ensure its safety by attacking them. (W-
pII.12.2:1-5)
“The ego is insane” (2:1). To the degree we identify with our egos, we are insane as well, as the Course so often
tells us. And we all identify with our egos far more than we realize; indeed, identification with the ego is almost
total. The ego is our fundamental assumption, the basis from which we operate all the time. We all see ourselves as
limited, separate selves, living in a body, doomed to die with it. This insanity is not our reality, however; our true,
shared Self remains sane, and that is our salvation and the ego’s doom.
The ego “stands [in fear] beyond the Everywhere” (2:2). God, and His creation, is all there is. But the ego thinks it
is somehow beyond all of that; it rejects God as Creator and tries to imagine itself as something outside of God and
His creation. The ego “stands…apart from All” (2:2). How can you be apart from All? All is All. It includes
everything. And the ego stands “in separation from the Infinite” (2:2). Same idea. All of these stances are,
obviously, wholly imaginary. It is not possible to be separate from the Infinite. But the ego defiantly, and insanely,
believes that this is its condition. That is the very definition of the ego. In this light, to believe that one is damned is
the height of egoity.
“In its insanity it thinks it has become a victor over God Himself” (2:3). That is what damnation is: it is the
assertion, “I have succeeded in thwarting the Will of God.” Guilt is an egoic denial of the power of God’s Love.
The thought “I will never learn this Course, I will never become enlightened” is an assertion that your will is more
powerful than God’s. If God’s Will is your happiness, then sadness is a proclamation of victory over God.
The Course is telling us that it is insane to think such things are possible. It does not condemn us for thinking them.
Rather, it tells us to stop listening to such thoughts. The ego is an impossibility: “The whole purpose of this course
is to teach you that the ego is unbelievable and will forever be unbelievable” (T-7.VIII.7:1). God is infinite; He is
Everywhere; He is All. If the ego is a thought that stands beyond God, separate and apart, then the ego is
unbelievable. Such a thing cannot be.
This illusion of separation we call the ego, this “terrible autonomy,” seems to show us that we have triumphed over
God’s Will for union. What a terrible thing it would be if this were reality! The ego’s very being, if it were real,
would be evidence of the most awful guilt imaginable. If I am the ego, then what I am, my very being, is an
accusation of murder most foul, for I have wrested my very existence from the destruction of God’s Will. And this
is just what we believe in identifying with the ego. This is the primal guilt beneath all our vague, uneasy feelings,
all our sense of unworthiness.
It dreams of punishment, and trembles at the figures in its dreams; its enemies,
who seek to murder it before it can ensure its safety by attacking them. (2:4)
In the “terrible autonomy” of our identification with the ego, we have placed ourselves at odds with God and the
universe. Everyone and everything else is a threat to our autonomy. Our dreams are filled with nightmarish
punishment for our “crime.”