What is the Last Judgment?

Christ’s Second Coming gives the Son of God this gift: to hear the Voice for God
proclaim that what is false is false, and what is true has never changed. And this the
judgment is in which perception ends. At first you see a world that has accepted
this as true, projected from a now corrected mind. And with this holy sight,
perception gives a silent blessing and then disappears, its goal accomplished and its
mission done.
(W-pII.10.1:1-4)
This is one of the great statements of the ultimate message ofA Course in Miracles: “what is false is false, and what is
true has never changed.” Put into these deceptively simple words, the message almost seems to be trite or
tautological, like “Red is red.” Of course “what is false is false, and what is true is true.” It’s obvious.
What gives the statement its profundity is the fact that we do not believe it. As we are told in the Text:
This is a very simple course. Perhaps you do not feel you need a course which, in
the end, teaches that only reality is true. But do you believe it? When you perceive
the real world, you will recognize that you did not believe it. (T-11.VIII.1:1–4)
All our problems can be summed up in this: We have taught ourselves to believe that what is false is true, and what
is true is false. We believe that the body, sin, guilt, fear, suffering, and death are all real. And we do not believe
(or at least strongly doubt) that spirit, holiness, innocence, love, and eternal life are real. The perception of the
real world shows us that the latter list—what is real—is really real, and the former list—what is false—is really
false. And that is the Last Judgment.
All the learning process we appear to be going through is really teaching us nothing except that one lesson, over
and over, in one example after another. Something we thought of as real—our own sin, or sin in a brother, or
death, or attack, or separation—is shown to be false, and the love we thought was absent is seen to be present.
Where we thought we saw sin we now see innocence. Where we thought we saw an attacker we now see our
savior (T-22.VI.8:1).
Then will he see each situation that he thought before was means to justify his anger
turned to an event which justifies his love. He will hear plainly that the calls to war
he heard before are really calls to peace. (T-25.III.6:5–6)
Try to imagine what it would be like to have some situation which, right now, seems to justify your anger turned
into something that, instead, justifies your love. That is what the miracle does. That is what “what is false is false,
and what is true has never changed,” really means. The real world is a kind of perception in which everything you
see justifies your love, because nothing exists which doesnot justify love. That is what is “real” about the real
world. What is false is that anger is ever justified: “Anger isnever justified” (T-30.VI.1:1). What is true is that love
isalways justified. God’s Love for you, for instance, is always justified. God’s Love for your brother is always
justified. And therefore, your love for your brother is also always justified.
“This the judgment is in which perception ends” (1:2). When we have achieved this final judgment about
everything, the purpose of perception is over. There is nothing more to perceive, because all reason for separation
is gone, and oneness is once again knowable and known. We no longer perceive one another, which requires
separation, subject and object; instead, weknow each other as parts of ourselves, “wholly lovable and wholly
loving” (T-1.III.2:3).
In two sentences we have the Second Coming, the Last Judgment, and the final step:
At first you see a world that has accepted this as true [the Second Coming],
projected from a now corrected mind. And with this holy sight, perception gives a
silent blessing [the Last Judgment] and then disappears [the final step], its goal
accomplished and its mission done. (1:3–4)
The “this” which we see the world as having accepted is the statement from the previous sentence: “what is false is
false, and what is true has never changed.” If theworld has accepted this statement, it indicates to me that this is not
simply the real world (the world seen through forgiving eyes) but the Second Coming, in which all minds have
been given to Christ. The unified, healed mind of the Sonship is still projecting, but “from a now corrected mind,”
and therefore what is being projected is a healed world. When we see this “holy sight,” we pronounce the Last
– 160 –
--- PAGE 161 ---
Judgment, which is a silent blessing, for as the Course says elsewhere, the Last Judgment is not a meting out of
punishment but a final healing (T-2.VIII.3:3).
With the “final healing,” then, the goal and mission of perception itself (as the Holy Spirit sees its purpose) is over,
and so perception itself vanishes, no longer needed. Here, perception vanishes; in the next paragraph (2:3) the
world itself, which is the object of all our perception, “slips away to nothingness.”
What’s the point of understanding these eschatological events? (Eschatology is “The branch of theology that is
concerned with the end of the world or of humankind” [American Heritage Dictionary].) They represent the goal
towards which the Course is leading us. As the Course itself says, in “Setting the Goal” (T-17.VI), when you accept
a certain goal you begin to overlook or discount everything that stands in its way, and start to focus on the things
that will bring the goal about. It says:
The value of deciding in advance what you want to happen is simply that you will
perceive the situation as a means to make it happen. You will therefore make every
effort to overlook what interferes with the accomplishment of your objective, and
concentrate on everything that helps you meet it. (T-17.VI.4:1–2)
If we have even some small understanding that the final goal is a silent blessing, a final healing, an overlooking of all
error and a recognition of the innocence of all of God’s creation, and of all of our own creations, we will begin to
perceive our day-to-day situations as “a means to make it happen.” We will make every effort to overlook attack
thoughts and condemning judgments, whether in our own minds or in others, because we will see them as
something that interferes with the goal we are seeking.
Another value of this understanding of the Last Judgment is that it eliminates one of the sources of our fear. We’ll
see more about this further on in this section, but for now, just realizing that God will not be running an inquisition
and punishing us for every minuscule transgression of His laws will come as a great relief to many of us, influenced
by our immersion in a culture where religion is often filled with fear of God’s wrath. The idea of a wrathful,
vengeful God is something the Course goes out of its way to counteract.

The final Judgment on the world contains no condemnation. For it sees the world
as totally forgiven, without sin and wholly purposeless. Without a cause, and now
without a function in Christ’s sight, it merely slips away to nothingness. There it
was born, and there it ends as well. And all the figures in the dream in which the
world began go with it. Bodies now are useless, and will therefore fade away,
because the Son of God is limitless. (W-pII.10.2:1-6)
No condemnation! It seems to be very hard for us to get beyond the idea of condemnation. We’ve been taught for
generations that in the Last Judgment, God will separate the “sheep” from the “goats,” the “wheat” from the “tares,”
the good guys from the bad guys, and will send the bad guys into everlasting punishment. We rather like the idea
of vengeance; it seems like justice to us. We go to movies and we cheer when the bad guys finally get blown away.
Of course, when it comes to picturing ourselves standing before God’s Final Judgment, we get a little nervous—
very nervous, in fact. Because we know we aren’t perfect.
How c