What Am I?

I am God’s Son, complete and healed and whole, shining in the reflection of His
Love. In me is His creation sanctified and guaranteed eternal life. In me is love
perfected, fear impossible, and joy established without opposite. I am the holy
home of God Himself. I am the Heaven where His Love resides. I am His holy
Sinlessness Itself, for in my purity abides His Own. (W-pII.14.1:1-6)
This section is one of the most powerful statements in the Course of its vision of our true nature, of how it can be
realized within this world of time and space, and of the function that follows naturally from the fact of what we
are. The opening paragraph is an extremely potent declaration, in the first person, of our real Identity. Often I find
that reading something like this aloud, by myself, helps me to focus on it and to feel what it is saying. An interesting
side effect is that making these statements firmly, saying them as if I truly believed them (even if I do not yet),
arouses opposing thoughts in my mind. Noting those opposing thoughts and writing them down can be a very
useful exercise in uncovering the hidden beliefs of the ego that have lodged in my mind, so that I can recognize
their presence and decide that I do not want them.
For instance, in the first sentence we read, “I am…complete and healed and whole.” I find opposing thoughts that
arise, such as: “I am far from complete; I have a long way to go.” “I am fragmented, not whole.” “I wish I were
healed but I’m not.” These are lessons the ego has taught me, and they are not true. I can recognize that these
thoughts are blocking my acceptance of the Course’s message, and I can choose against them. For example, I might
say, “I feel incomplete and I believe in my incompleteness, but in reality I am already complete. I want to know my
own completion.”
I am God’s Son…shining in the reflection of His Love. (1:1)
The light in me is the reflection of God’s Light and God’s Love. I shine, but my glory is a reflected glory, as the
moon’s light is completely dependent on that of the sun. It is something that emanates from God and radiates
through me but not from me, and unless I acknowledge my connection with my Creator, I mask that shining.
In me is His creation sanctified and guaranteed eternal life. (1:2)
This sounds like something that, in traditional Christianity, Jesus might say, similar to “I am the way, the truth, and
the life.” And indeed, Jesus might say this. But so can we! We are all what he was and is; that is what he is telling
us in this Course. Creation is “sanctified” (made holy) in me. What I am, my very being, is what makes creation
holy. I do not need to be made holy or to become holy; I am the source (a reflected source, but still a source) of
holiness. And what I am guarantees eternal life for all creation, because all creation is what I am. I amGod’s Son,
the radiance of His Love which has shined out and become me; that is also what all creation is, the extension of His
Love. The fact that I am God’s Son, an emanation of His Being, like a sunbeam to the sun, guarantees eternal life
because what God is, is eternal, and if I am simply an effect of God, Who is eternal, then I, too, must be eternal,
“forever and forever” His effect.
In me is love perfected, fear impossible, and joy established without opposite. (1:3)
We find it very difficult to believe that perfect love is in us. “You have so little faith in yourself because you are
unwilling to accept the fact that perfect love is in you” (T-15.VI.2:1). So it isn’t really that believing this is difficult;
it is that we are unwilling to accept it! Our ego identity depends on its not being true. If perfect love from God is
in us, then what we are derives from God and not from ourselves alone, which is what the ego wants to believe.
We would rather be fear than be love, because we made fear. The truth is still the truth; perfect loveis in us,
whether or not we believe it, whether or not we think we want it. What we believe cannot change God’s creation.
Fear is impossible in me. Now that generates a lot of negative feedback, doesn’t it? “If fear is impossible, then what
the hell is this thing I am feeling?” What is it? The Course would reply that what we feel is an illusion, a
nonexistent nothing, a figment of our imagination. What it is is meaningless. What if, when I felt afraid, I told
myself, “I think I am feeling fear, but fear in me is impossible”? What if I realized that what I think I am feelingis
not in me, but in a delusional concept of myself I have mistaken for myself?
“And joy established without opposite.” That is my reality. I don’t experience it that way now, probably. Even
when I do feel joy, there is always an opposite lurking in the shadows. But that opposite, that fear, that dark
presence, is unreal. It is nothing to be afraid of and does not, in reality, exist.
I am the holy Home of God Himself. (1:4)
– 226 –
--- PAGE 227 ---
Wow! That makes more of an impact on us, put that way, than simply saying, “God is in me.” I am God’s Home.
Home is not just some place God happens to be; it is where He resides, where He chooses to be, where He can
make Himself comfortable, so to speak. In Psalm 132:14, God is said to have proclaimed about Zion, or
Jerusalem, “This [is] my rest for ever: here will I dwell; for I have desired it.” Now,we are His home. Now, He
speaks to you, and to me, saying that we are His rest forever, that He will dwell in us because He has desired it.
That was His intention all along when He created us.
I am the Heaven where His Love resides. (1:5)
We may have naively believed that God lives in Heaven and not in us. Here, we see that, yes, God lives or resides
in Heaven, butwe are Heaven. What a mind-blower that is! I’ll bet you have thought, for most of your life, that if
you were good enough, or if you were holy enough, or if you had enough faith, you’d get to go to Heaven. Sorry,
no go. You can’t go to Heaven because you are Heaven, where God’s Love resides.
I am His holy Sinlessness Itself, for in my purity abides His own.(1:6)
Did you notice that all three of these sentences use words about God’s place of residence? “…the holy Home…
where His Love resides…in my purity abides His own.” God isn’t just passing through! He isn’t just visiting. He
lives here, in me, in you; this is His home. He abides [stays, remains] here, in us.
I have to confess that I can’t quite yet wrap my mind around the idea thatI am God’s holy Sinlessness. “Sinlessness”
seems like a rather abstract concept; I have a little trouble understanding how I canbe sinlessness. The second half
of the sentence helps me out a little: “for in my purity abides His own.”
I can sort of grasp it by an analogy. A parent who gives his or her time and energy to raising a child, teaching it all
they know, finds their own success and happiness in that child’s success and happiness. “My child’s happiness is my
own. My child’s success is my own.” I think it is similar to that. God extended Himself as us. What we are is His
extension. Our purityis His; if we are not sinless, no more is He. We are what He is, extended outward. If I am
not pure, He is not, for our nature is His. If we are what He is, then it is true in reverse; He is what we are.
Therefore, “I am His holy Sinlessness Itself.”

Our use for words is almost over now. Yet in the final days of this one year we gave
to God together, you and I, we found a single purpose that we shared. And thus
you joined with me, so what I am are you as well. The truth of what we are is not
for words to speak of nor describe. Yet we can realise our function here, and words
can speak of this and teach it, too, if we exemplify the words in us. (W-pII.14.2:1-
5)
Throughout the Workbook, words have been used to instruct and inspire us, and we have used the words given to
us in our practicing. When we are truly ready to “graduate” from the Workbook and its level of training, we will
be ready to