A course
A course
(14 instances)
In
troduction
This is a course in miracles. It is a required course. Only the time you take it is voluntary. Free will does not mean that you can establish the curriculum. It means only that you may elect what you want to take at a given time.
-> The course does not aim at teaching the meaning of love, for that is beyond what can be taught. It does aim, however, at removing the blocks to the awareness of love’s presence, which is your natural inheritance. The opposite of love is fear, but what is all-encompassing can have no opposite.
-> This course can therefore be summed up very simply in this way:
-> Nothing real can be threatened. Nothing unreal exists.
-> Herein lies the peace of God.
3:1
- Introduction
This is a course in mind training. 3:1:1
8:1
- Introduction
You are hampered in your progress by your demands to know what you do not know. This is actually a way of holding on to deprivation. You cannot reasonably object to following instructions in a course for knowing on the grounds that you do not know. The need for the course is implicit in your objection. Knowledge is not the motivation for learning this course. Peace is. 8:1:1
10:8 - The Problem and the Answer
This is a very simple course. Perhaps you do not feel that a course which, in the end, teaches nothing more than that only reality is true is necessary. But do you believe it? 10:8:74
This is not a course in the play of ideas, but in their practical application. Nothing could be more specific than to be told very clearly that if you ask you will receive. The Holy Spirit will answer every specific problem as long as you believe that problems are specific.  10:8:80
11:6 - The Sane Curriculum
We have said that the ego’s rule is, “Seek and do not find.” Translated into curricular terms, this is the same as saying, “Try to learn but do not succeed.” The result of this curriculum goal is obvious. Every legitimate teaching aid, every real instruction, and every sensible guide to learning will be misinterpreted. For they are all for learning facilitation, which this strange curriculum goal is against. If you are trying to learn how not to learn and are using the aim of teaching to defeat itself, what can you expect but confusion? The curriculum does not make sense.
-> This kind of “learning” has so weakened your mind that you cannot love, for the curriculum you have chosen is against love and amounts to a course in how to attack yourself.  11:6:49-50
12:4
- Healing and Time
For this is a course on love because it is about you. You have been told that your function in this world is healing, and your function in Heaven is creating. 12:4:23
16
:4 - The Reward of Teaching
This is a course in how to know yourself. You have taught what you are but have not let what you are teach you. 16:4:24
19:5 - The Obstacles to Peace
The Incorruptable Body
What better way to teach the first and fundamental principle in a course on miracles than by showing you the one which seems to be the hardest can be accomplished first? 19:5:83
21
:8 - Perception and Wishes
This is a course in cause and
not
effect. 21:8:77
2
6:8 - Review of Principles
This is a course in miracles. And as such, the laws of healing must be understood before the purpose of the course can be accomplished. 26:8:1
W-157 - Into His Presence would I enter now.
The time will come when you will not return in the same form in which you now appear, for you will have no need of it. Yet now it has a purpose and will serve it well. Today we will embark upon a course you have not dreamed of. But the Holy One, the Giver of the happy dreams of life, Translator of perception into truth, the holy Guide to Heaven given you has dreamed for you this journey which you make and start today with the experience this day holds out to you to be your own. W-157:8
Wh
o Are God’s Teacher’s?
There is a course for every teacher of God. The form of the course varies greatly. So do the particular teaching aids involved. But the content of the course never changes. Its central theme is always, “God’s Son is guiltless, and in his innocence is his salvation.” It can be taught by actions or thoughts, in words or soundlessly, in any language or in no language, in any place or time or manner. It does not matter who the teacher was before he heard the Call. He has become a savior by his answering. He has seen someone else as himself. He has therefore found his own salvation and the salvation of the world. In his rebirth is the world reborn.