Always Remember
Always Remember
(2 instances)
8:5 - The Light of the World
Of yourselves you can do nothing, because of yourselves you are nothing. I am nothing without the Father, and you are nothing without me, because by denying the Father you deny yourself. I will always remember you, and in my remembrance of you lies your remembrance of yourself. In our remembrance of each other lies our remembrance of God, and in this remembrance lies your freedom, because your freedom is in Him. Join then with me in praise of Him and you whom He created. This is our gift of gratitude to Him, which He will share with all His creations, to whom He gives equally whatever is acceptable to Him. Because it is acceptable to Him, it is the gift of freedom, which is His Will for all His Sons. By offering freedom, you will be free. 8:5:33
10:2 Projection versus Extension
Always remember that what He gives, He holds, so that nothing He gives can contradict Him. You who share His Life must share it to know it, for sharing is knowing. Blessed are you who learn that to hear the Will of your Father is to know your own. For it is your will to be like Him, Whose Will it is that it be so. God’s Will is that His Son be one, and united with Him in His Oneness. That is why healing is the beginning of the recognition that your will is His. 10:2:15
Remember Always
(7 instances)
6:2 - The Message of the Crucifixion
Remember always that what you believe you will teach. 6:2:10
9:3 - Atonement as a Lesson in Sharing
Remember always that your identity is shared and that its sharing is its reality. 9:3:9
9:7 - Graduer versus Grandiosity
Remember always that you cannot be anywhere except in the Mind of God. 9:7:52
11:8 - The Guide for Miracles
Remember always that you see what you seek, for what you seek you will find. 11:8:66
13:3 - The Shadow of Guilt
Remember always that it is impossible to condemn the Son of God in part.  13:3:16
13:2:8 - The Decision for Guiltlessness
Remember always that mind is one and cause is one. 13:2:8
14:7 - The Test of Truth
Those who remember always that they know nothing, but who have become willing to learn everything, will learn it. 14:7:72
Remember
(320 instances)