Angels
A
ngel
s
(10 instances)
2:
2 -
The Reinterpretation of Defenses
The Atonement actually began long before the crucifixion. Many Souls offered their efforts on behalf of the separated ones, but they could not withstand the strength of the attack and had to be brought back.
Angels
came, too, but their protection did not suffice because the separated ones were not interested in peace. They had already split their minds and were bent on further dividing rather than reintegrating. The levels they introduced into their minds turned against each other, and they established differences, divisions, cleavages, dispersions, and all the other concepts related to the increasing splits which they produced. 2:2:38
19
:5
- The
O
bsta
cels t
o Peace
The fear of death will go as its appeal is yielded to love’s real attraction. The end of sin, which nestles quietly in the safety of your relationship, protected by your union, ready to grow into a mighty force for God, is very near. The infancy of salvation is carefully guarded by love, preserved from every thought that would attack it and quietly made ready to fulfill the mighty task for which it was given you. Your newborn purpose is nursed by
angels
, cherished by the Holy Spirit, and protected by God Himself. It needs not your protection; it is yours. For it is deathless, and within it lies the end of death. 19:5:86
2
5
:9
-
The Principle of Salvation
So do they think the loss of sin a curse. And flee [the blessing of] the Holy Spirit as if He were a messenger from hell sent from above in treachery and guile to work God’s vengeance on them in the guise of a deliverer and friend. What could He be to them except a devil dressed to deceive within an angel’s cloak? And what escape has He for them except a door to hell that seems to look like Heaven’s gate? 25:9:69
2
6:
10
-
For
They H
ave
Come
Around you
angels
hover lovingly, to keep away all darkened thoughts of sin and keep the light where it has entered in. Your footprints lighten up the world, for where you walk forgiveness gladly goes with you. No one on earth but offers thanks to one who has restored his home and sheltered him from bitter winter and the freezing cold. And shall the Lord of Heaven and His Son give less in gratitude for so much more? 26:10:83
W
-1
31
-
No
one can
fail
who ask
s
to reach
the tru
th
Put out your hand and see how easily the door swings open with your one intent to go beyond it.
Angels
light the way, so that all darkness vanishes and you are standing in a light so bright and clear that you can understand all things you see. A tiny moment of surprise, perhaps, will make you pause before you realize the world you see before you in the light reflects the truth you knew and did not quite forget in wandering away in dreams. W-131:16
W
-1
61
- Give
me your
blessi
ng,
hol
y Son
of
God
This do the body’s eyes behold in one whom Heaven cherishes, the
angels
love, and God created perfect. This is his reality. And in Christ’s vision is his loveliness reflected in a form so holy and so beautiful that you could scarce refrain from kneeling at his feet. Yet you will take his hand instead, for you are like him in the sight that sees him thus. W-161:9
W
-18
3 -
I call
upon
G
od
’s Name
and m
y own
God’s Name cannot be heard without response, nor said without an echo in the mind which calls you to remember. Say His Name, and you invite the
angels
to surround the ground on which you stand and sing to you as they spread out their wings to keep you safe and shelter you from every worldly thought that would intrude upon your holiness. W-183:2
W-
30
3
-
The
holy
Chris
t i
s born
in my
today
Watch with me,
angels
; watch with me today. Let all God’s holy thoughts surround me and be still with me while Heaven’s Son is born. Let earthly sounds be quiet and the sights to which I am accustomed disappear. Let Christ be welcomed where He is at home, and let Him hear the sounds He understands and see but sights which show His Father’s Love. Let Him no longer be a stranger here, for He is born again in me today. W-303:1
E
pil
ogue
….
We trust our ways to Him and say “Amen.” In peace we will continue in His way and trust all things to Him. In confidence we wait His answers, as we ask His Will in everything we do. He loves God’s Son as we would love him, and He teaches us how to behold him through His eyes and love him as He does. You do not walk alone. God’s
angels
hover close and all about. His Love surrounds you, and of this be sure: that I will never leave you comfortless.