Brain
Bra
in
T: 5 instances
W: 3 instances
2:
2
- The
Re
i
nterp
retation of
Defence
s
Intellectualization is a term which stems from the mind-brain confusion. “Right-mindedness” is the device which defends the right mind and gives it control over the body. “Intellectualization” implies a split, while “right-mindedness” involves healing. 2:2:26
3
:3
-
Atonement
wi
thout Sa
c
rifi
ce
There has been some human controversy about the nature of seeing in relation to the integrative powers of the brain. Correctly understood, the issue revolves around the question of whether the body or the mind can see (or understand). This is not really open to question at all. The body is not capable of understanding, and only the mind can perceive anything. A pure mind knows the truth, and this is its strength. It cannot attack the body because it recognizes exactly what the body is. This is what “a sane mind in a sane body” really means. It does not confuse destruction with innocence because it associates innocence with strength, not with weakness. 3:3:23
1
1:10
-
Gu
il
tles
sness and
Invu
lnera
bility
The acceptance of guilt into the Mind of God’s Son was the beginning of the separation, as the acceptance of the Atonement is its end. The world you see is the delusional system of those made mad by guilt. Look carefully at this world, and you will realize that this is so. For this world is the symbol of punishment, and all the laws which seem to govern it are the laws of death. Children are born into it through pain and in pain. Their growth is attended by suffering, and they learn of sorrow and separation and death. Their minds are trapped in their brain, and its powers decline if their bodies are hurt. They seem to love, yet they desert and are deserted. They appear to lose what they love, perhaps the most insane belief of all. And their bodies wither and gasp and are laid in the ground and seem to be no more. Not one of them but has thought that God is cruel. 11:10:86
22
:
2 - T
he Me
ssage of
the Hol
y
Rel
at
ion
ship
Yet we have heard a very similar description earlier, but it was not of you. And yet this strange idea, which it does accurately describe, you think is you. Reason would tell you that the world you see through eyes which are not yours must make no sense to you. To whom would vision such as this send back its messages? Surely not you, whose sight is wholly independent of the eyes which look upon the world. If this is not your vision, what can it show to you? The brain cannot interpret what your vision sees. This you would understand. The brain interprets to the body, of which it is a part. But what it says, you cannot understand. Yet you have listened to it. And long and hard you tried to understand its messages. You did not realize it is impossible to understand what fails entirely to reach you. 22:2:6
W9
2 - M
ira
cles a
re see
n in li
ght and
light
an
d str
ength a
re on
e.
The idea for today is an extension of the previous one. You do not think of light in terms of strength and darkness in terms of weakness. That is because your idea of what seeing means is tied up with the body and its eyes and brain. This is why you believe that you can change what you see by putting little bits of glass or other clear material before your eyes held in a frame or placed against the eye.
These are among the many magical beliefs that come from the conviction you are a body and the body’s eyes can see. You also believe the body’s brain can think. If you but understood the nature of thought, you could but laugh at this insane idea. It is as if you thought you held the match that lights the sun and gives it all its warmth or that you had the universe imprisoned in your hand, securely bound until you let it go. Yet this is no more foolish than to believe the body’s eyes can see, the brain can think.