Happy Dream
Happ
y Dr
eam
(4 instances)
18
:3 -
The Basis of the Dream
Your special relationship will be a means for undoing guilt in everyone blessed through your holy relationship. It will be
a happy dream
, and one which you will share with all who come within your sight. Through it, the blessing which the Holy Spirit has laid upon it will be extended. 18:3:21
18
:6
- Th
e Happy D
ream
It is no dream to love your brother as yourself. Nor is your holy relationship a dream. All that remains of dreams within it is that it is still a special relationship. Yet it is very useful to the Holy Spirit, Who has a special function here. It will become the
happy dream
through which He can spread joy to thousands on thousands who believe that love is fear, not happiness. Let Him fulfill the function that He gave to your relationship by accepting it for you, and nothing will be wanting that would make of it what He would have it be. 16:8:45
30
:
5
-
The T
ruth B
ehin
d Illu
sion
s
Salvation is a paradox indeed!
What could it be except a
happy dream
? It asks you but that you forgive all things that no one ever did, to overlook what is not there, and not to look upon the unreal as reality. You are but asked to let your will be done and seek no longer for the things you do not want. And you are asked to let yourself be free of all the dreams of what you never were and seek no more to substitute the strength of idle wishes for the Will of God. 30:5:55
30
:9 -
Chang
less R
ealit
y
The miracle is means to demonstrate that all appearances can change because they are appearances and cannot have the changelessness reality entails. The miracle attests salvation from appearances by showing they can change. Your brother has a changelessness in him beyond appearance and deception both. It is obscured by changing views of him which you perceive as his reality. The
happy dream
about him takes the form of the appearance of his perfect health, his perfect freedom from all forms of lack, and safety from disaster of all kinds. The miracle is proof he is not bound by loss or suffering in any form because it can so easily be changed. This demonstrates that it was never real and could not stem from his reality. For that is changeless and has no effects which anything in Heaven or on earth could ever alter. But appearances are shown to be unreal because they change.