I am as God created me
I am
as God created me
(9 instances)
3
1
:8 -
Choo
se Once
Agai
n
Learn then the happy habit of response to all temptation to perceive yourself as weak and miserable with these words:
->
I am as God created me
. His Son can suffer nothing. And I
am
His Son.
31:
8:
89-
90
W
-9
4 - I a
m as G
od
creat
ed me
.
I am as God created me. I am His Son eternally. W-94:4
I am as God created me. I am His Son eternally. W-94:8
W-1
10 -
I am as
God cr
eated
me
.
I am as God created me. His Son can suffer nothing. And I am His Son. W-110:7
I am as God created me. W-110:12
W
-
1
12
- Review 93 - 94
.
I am as God created me. W-112:7
W-1
2
0
- Review
109
-
1
10
.
I am as God created me. W-120:7
W-139 - I will accept Atonement for myself.
Here is the end of choice.
For here we come to a decision to accept ourselves as God created us
. W-139:1
W
-
16
2
-
I am as
God
crea
ted m
e.
(There is no mention of the line in this exercise -&gt. See below)
You a
re as Go
d
cre
ated you
(12 instances)
31
:8
-
Choose
O
nce
Aga
in
You are as God created you, and so is every living thing you look upon, regardless of the images you see.  31:8:92
W-9
3
-
Ligh
t, pe
ace a
nd joy
abid
e
in m
e.
Salvation requires the acceptance of but one thought—you are as God created you, not what you made of yourself.
Whatever evil you may think you did, you are as God created you. Whatever mistakes you made, the truth about you is unchanged. Creation is eternal and unalterable. Your sinlessness is guaranteed by God. You are and will forever be exactly as you were created. Light and joy and peace abide in you because God put them there. W-93:7
W-94 - I am as God created me.
Today we continue with the one idea which brings complete salvation; the one statement which makes all forms of temptation powerless; the one thought which renders the ego silent and entirely undone. You are as God created you. The sounds of this world are still, the sights of this world disappear, and all the thoughts that this world ever held are wiped away forever by this one idea. Here is salvation accomplished. Here is sanity restored.
-> True light is strength, and strength is sinlessness. If you remain as God created you, you must be strong and light must be in you. He Who ensured your sinlessness must be the guarantee of strength and light as well. You are as God created you. Darkness cannot obscure the glory of the Son of God. You stand in light, strong in the sinlessness in which you were created and in which you will remain throughout eternity. W-94:1-2
Tell yourself frequently today that you are as God created you. And be sure to respond to anyone who seems to irritate you with these words:
-> You are as God created you. You are His Son eternally. W-94:9-10
W-110 - I am as God created me.
In this one thought is all the past undone; the present saved to quietly extend into a timeless future. If you are as God created you, then there has been no separation of your mind from His, no split between your mind and other minds, and only unity within your own. W-110:4
You are as God created you. Today honor your Self. Let graven images you made to be the Son of God instead of what He is be worshiped not today. Deep in your mind the holy Christ in you is waiting your acknowledgment as you. And you are lost and do not know yourself while He is unacknowledged and unknown. W-110:9
W
-132
-
I loose the world from all I thought it was.
A lesson earlier repeated once must now be stressed again, for it contains the firm foundation for today’s idea. You are as God created you. There is no place where you can suffer and no time that can bring change to your eternal state. How can a world of time and place exist if you remain as God created you? W-132:10
Yet if you are as God created you, you cannot think apart from Him nor make what does not share His timelessness and love. Are these inherent in the world you see? Does it create like Him? Unless it does, it is not real and cannot be at all. If you are real, the world you see is false, for God’s creation is unlike the world in every way. And as it was His thought by which you were created, so it is your thoughts which made it and must set it free that you may know the thoughts you share with God. W-132:12
W-162 - I am as God created me.
And who would not be brother to you now—you, his redeemer and his savior. Who could fail to welcome you into his heart with loving invitation, eager to unite with one like him in holiness? You are as God created you. These words dispel the night, and darkness is no more. The light is come today to bless the world, for you have recognized the Son of God, and in your recognition is the world’s. W-162:6
W
-
191
-
I am the holy Son of God Himself.
Yet what is it except a game you play in which identity can be denied? You are as God created you. All else but this one thing is folly to believe. In this one thought is everything set free. In this one truth are all illusions gone. In this one fact is sinlessness proclaimed to be forever part of everything, the central core of its existence, and its guarantee of immortality. W-191:4