Ideas leave not their source
Ideas leave not their source
(6 instances)
2
6:8 - Review of Principles
Ideas leave not their source
, and their effects but seem to be apart from them. Ideas are of the mind. What is projected out and seems to be external to the mind is not outside at all but an effect of what is in and has not left its source. 26:8:49
Cause and effect are one, not separate. God wills you learn what always has been true—that He created you as part of Him, and this must still be true because ideas
leave not their source
. Such is creation’s law—that each idea the mind conceives but adds to its abundance, never takes away. 26:8:60
W-132 - I loose the world from all I thought it was.
Ideas leave not their source
. This central theme is often stated in the text and must be borne in mind if you would understand the lesson for today. W-132:6
What is the lesson for today except another way of saying that to know your Self is the salvation of the world? To free the world from every kind of pain is but to change your mind about yourself. There is no world apart from your ideas because
ideas leave not their source
, and you maintain the world within your mind in thought. W-132:11
W
-156 - I was with God in perfect holiness.
Today’s idea but states the simple truth that makes the thought of sin impossible. It promises there is no cause for guilt, and being causeless it does not exist. It follows surely from the basic thought so often mentioned in the text—
ideas leave not their source
. If this be true, how can you be apart from God? How could you walk the world alone and separate from your Source? W-156:1
W-15
8 - Today I learn to I give as I receive.
What has been given you? The knowledge that you are a mind, in Mind and purely mind, sinless forever, wholly unafraid because you were created out of Love.
Nor have you left your Source, remaining as you were created.
This was given you as knowledge which you cannot lose. It was given as well to every living thing, for by that knowledge only does it live.
W-159 - I give the miracles I have received.
Take from His storehouse that its treasures may increase. His lilies do not leave their home when they are carried back into the world. Their roots remain.
They do not leave their source
, but carry its beneficence with them and turn the world into a garden like the one they came from and to which they go again with added fragrance. Now are they twice blessed. The messages they brought from Christ have been delivered and returned to them. And they return them gladly unto Him.
W
-167 - There is one life, and that I share with God.
A thought is in the mind. It can be then applied as mind directs it. But its origin is where it must be changed if change occurs.
Ideas leave not their source.
The emphasis this course has placed on that idea is due to its centrality in our attempts to change your mind about yourself. It is the reason you can heal. It is the cause of healing. It is why you cannot die. Its truth established you as one with God. W-167:3
Who walks with me? […]
I walk with God in perfect holiness.
I light the world, I light my mind an all
The minds which God created one with me.  W-156:8-9
We will pause a moment as He tells us, “I am here”.   Your practicing will now begin to take the earnesness of love to hlep yuo keep your mind from wantering from its intent.  Be not afriad of timid.  There can ber no doubt that you will reach your final goal.  W-153:20-21
Remember always that [I] cannot be anywhere
except
in the Mind of God.  9:7:52