Lessons 1 - 50
Lessons 1 - 50
Nothing I see in this room [on this street, from this window in this place] means anything.
I have given everything I see in this room [on this street, from this window in this place] all the meaning that it has for me.
I do not understand anything I see in this room [on this street, from this window in this place].
These thoughts do not mean anything.  They are like the things I see in this room [on this street, from this window in this place].
I am never upset for the reason I think.
There are no small upsets. They are all equally disturbing to my peace of mind.
I cannot keep this form of upset and let the others go.  For the purposes of these exercises, then, I will regard them all as the same.
I am upset because I see something that is not there.
I see only the past.
My mind is preoccupied with past thoughts.
I see nothing as it is now.
My thoughts do not mean anything.
This idea will help to release me from all that I now believe.
My meaningless thoughts are showing me a meaningless world.
I am upset because I see a meaningless world.
A meaningless world engenders fear.
Engenders: To produce as an effect
God did not create a meaningless world.
My thought are images which I have made.
I have no neutral thoughts.
I see no neutral things.
I am not alone in experiencing the effects of my seeing.
I am not alone in experiencing the effects of my thoughts.
I am determined to see.
I am determined to see things differently.
What I see is a form of vengeance.
Vengeance: : punishment inflicted in retaliation for an injury or offence.
I see only the perishable.
I see nothing that will last.
What I see is not real.
What I see is a form of vengeance.
Is this the world I really want to see?
I can escape the world by giving up attack thoughts.
I do not perceive my own best interests.
I do not know what anything is for.
My attack thoughts are attacking my invulnerability.
I am concerned about ____
I am afraid _____ will happen.
That thought is an attack thought.
Above all else I want to see.
Vision had no cost to anyone. It can only bless.
Above all else, I want to see things differently.
I am asking to see the purpose of the universe.
God is in everything I see.
God is in everything I see because God is in my mind.
I am not the victim of the world I see.
I have invented the world I see.
I have invented this situation as I see it.
There is another way of looking at the world.
There is another way of looking at this.
I can see peace instead of this.
I could see peace in this situation instead of what I see in it now.
I can replace my feelings of _____ with peace.
My mind is part of God’s.  I am very holy.
My holiness envelops everything I see.
My holiness blesses the world.
There is nothing my holiness cannot do.
My holiness is my salvation.
My unloving thoughts about ____ are keeping me in hell. My holiness is my salvation.
I an a blessed Son of God.
God goes with me wherever I go.
God is my strength. Vision is His gift.
God is my Source. I cannot see apart from Him.
God is the Light in which I see.
God is the Mind with which I think.
My real thoughts are in my mind.  I would like to find them.
God is the Love in which I forgive.
God is the Love in which I forgive you, [name].
God is the Love in which I forgive myself.
God is the Strength in which I trust.
There is nothing to fear.
God’s Voice speaks to me all through the day.
I am sustained by the Love of God.