Review II (61 - 80)
Review II (61 - 80)
Regard these practice periods as dedications to the way, the truth and the life.
Because I will to know myself, I see you as God’s Son and my brother. (8:11:119)
#
lesson
noteworthy text
81
61
I am the light of the world.
Let me not obscure the light of the world in me.
Let the light of the world shine through this appearance.
This shadow will vanish before the light.
62
Forgiveness is my function as the light of the world
Let this help me to learn what forgiveness means.
Let me not separate my function from my will.
I would not use this for an alien purpose.
82
63
The light of the world brings peace to every mind through my forgiveness.
Let peace extend from my mind to your, [name].
I share the light of the world with you, [name].
Through my forgiveness I can see this as it is.
64
Let me not forget my function.
Let me not use this to hide my function from me.
I would use this an an opportunity to fulfil my function.
This may threaten my ego but cannot change my function in any way.
83
65
My only function is the one God gave me.
My perception of this does not change my function.
This does not give me a function other than the one God gave me.
Let me not use this to justify a function God did not give me.
66
My happiness and my function are one.
This cannot separate y happiness from my function.
The oneness of my happiness and my function remains wholly unaffected by this.
Nothing, including this, can justify the illusion of happiness apart form my function.
84
67
Love created me like itself.
Let me not see an illusion of myself in this.
As I look on this, let me remember my Creator.
My Creator did not create this as I see it.
68
Love holds no grievances
This is no justification for denying myself.
I will not use this to attack love.
Let this not tempt me to attach myself.
85
69
My grievances hid the light of the world in me.
Let me not use this as a block to sight.
The light of the world will shine all this away.
I have no need for this. I want to see.
70
My salvation comes from me.
Let this not tempt me to look away from me for my salvation.
I will not let this interfere with my awareness of the Source of my salvation.
This has no power to remove salvation from me.
86
71
Only God's plan for salvation will work.
God's plan for salvation will save me from my perception of this.
This is no exception in God's plan for my salvation.
Let me perceive this only in the light of God's plan for salvation
72
Holding grievances is an attack on God's plan for salvation.
I am choosing between misperceptions and salvation as I look on this.
If I see ground for grievances in this, I will not see the grounds for my salvation.
This calls for salvation, not attack.
87
73
I will there be light.
This cannot hide the light I will to see.
You stand with me in light, [name].
In the light this will look different.
74
There is no will but God's
Let me perceive this in accordance with the Will of God.
It is God's Will you are His Son, [name], and mine as well.
This is part of God's Will for me, however I may see it.
88
75
The light has come.
This cannot show me darkness, for the light has come.
The light in you is all that I would see, [name].
I would see in this only what is there.
76
I am under no laws but God's.
My perception of this shows me I believe in laws which do not exist.
I see only the laws of God as work in this.
Let me allow God's laws to work in this and not my own.
89
77
I am entitled to miracles.
Behind this is a miracle to which I am entitled.
Let me not hold a grievance against you, [name], but offer you the miracle that belongs to you instead.
See truly, this offers me a miracle.
**Now I would accept only what the Laws of God entitle me to have that I may use it on behalf of the function He has given me.
78
Let miracles replace grievances.
I would not hold this grievance apart from my salvation.
Let our grievances be replaced by miracles, [name].
Beyond this is the miracles by which all my grievances are replaced.
90
79
Let me recognize the problem so it can be solved.
This presents a problem to me which I would have resolved.
The miracle behind this grievance will resolve it for me,
The answer to this problem is the miracle which it conceals.
80
Let me recognize my problems have been solved.
I need not wait for this to be resolved.
The answer to this problem is already given me if I will accept it.
Time cannot separate this problem from its solution.