Review I ( 1 - 50)
Review I ( 1 - 50)
#
lesson
noteworthy text
51
1
Nothing I see means anything.
I see nothing and nothing has no meaning.
2
I have given what I see all the meaning it has for me.
I have judged everything I look upon.  This is not vision. I do not want to see according to my judgements.
3
I do not understand anything I see.
How can I understand when I have judged amiss?  What I see is the projection of my own errors of thought. I do not understand because what I see is not understandable.
4
These thoughts do not mean anything.
The thought of which I am aware do not mean anything because I am trying to think without God.
5
I am never upset for the reason I think.
I have not realized how much I have misused everything I see by assigning this role [my 'enemy'] to it – I have done this to defend a thought system which has hurt me and which I no longer want. I am willing to let it go.
52
6
I am upset because I see what is not there.
When I am upset, it is always because I have replaced reality with illusions which I made up.  Nothing in God's creation is affected in anyway by this confusion of mine. I am always upset by nothing.
7
I see only the past.
I hold the past against everyone and everything, making them my 'enemies'. When I have forgiven myself and remembered who I am, I will bless everyone and everything I see.
8
My mind is preoccupied with past thoughts
I see only my own thoughts, and my mind is preoccupied with the past.  Let me learn to give the past away, realizing in so doing I am giving up nothing.
9
I see nothing as it is now.
The past or the present: to see or not.
10
My thoughts do not mean anything.
I have no private thoughts.
53
11
My meaningless thoughts are showing me a meaningless world.
Since the thoughts of which I am aware do not mean anything, the world which pictures them can have no meaning.
12
I am upset because I see a meaningless world.
Insane thoughts are upsetting.  They produce a world in which there is no order anywhere.
13
A meaningless world engenders fear.
Nothing in madness is dependable. But such a world is not real.
14
God did not create a meaningless world.
Why should I continue to suffer from the effects of my own insane thoughts when the perfection of creation is my home?
15
My thoughts are images which I have made.
Whatever I see reflects my thoughts. It is my thoughts which tell me where I am and what I am.
54
16
I have no neutral thoughts.
Neutral thoughts are impossible because all thoughts have power.
17
I see no neutral things.
Let me look on the world I see as the representation of my own state of mind.
18
I am not alone in the effects of my seeing.
I can call upon my real thoughts which share everything with everyone.
19
I am not alone in the effects of my thoughts.
I am alone in nothing. Everything I think or say or do touches all the universe.
20
I am determined to see.
I would look upon the witnesses that show me the thinking of the world has been changed.
55
21
I am determined to see things differently.
I am determined to see the witnesses to the truth in me.
22
What I see is a form of vengeance.
My loving thoughts will save me from this perception of the world and give me the peace God intended me to have.
23
I can escape the world by giving up attack thoughts.
Herein lies my salvation, and nowhere else.
24
I do not perceive my own best interests.
I am willing to follow the Guide God has given me to find out what my own best interests are.
25
I do not know what anything is for.
To me, the purpose of everything is to prove that my illusions about myself are real.
56
26
My attack thoughts are attacking my invulnerability.
I have tried to give my inheritance away in exchange for the world I see. My own real thoughts will teach me what it is.
27
I am determined to see.
I realize that vision is my greatest need.
28
I am determined to see differently.
I would let the door behind this world be opened for me that I may look past it to the world that reflects the love of God.
29
God is in everything I see.
God is still everywhere and in everything forever.
30
God is in everything I see because God is in my mind.
In my own mind, behind all my insane thoughts of separation and attack, is the knowledge that all is one forever.
57
31
I am not the victim of the world I see.
The prison door is open. I can leave it simply by walking out.
32
I have invented the world I see.
All I need to do is recognize that I am free.
33
There is another way of looking at the world.
Since the purpose of the world is not the one I ascribed to it, there must be another way to look at it.
34
I could see peace instead of this.
When I see the world asa  place of freedom, I will realize it reflects the laws of God.
35
My mind is part of God's. I am very holy.
As I share the peace of the world with my brothers, I begin to understand that this peace comes from deep within myself.
58
36
My holiness envelops everything I see.
From my holiness does the perception of the real world come.
37
My holiness blesses the world.
Everyone and everything I see in its light shares in the joy it brings to me
38
There is nothing my holiness cannot do.
What is there to be save from except illusions? [Illusions: False ideas about myself]
39
My holiness is my salvation.
I have accepted my holiness, nothing can make me afraid.
40
I am blessed as a Son of God.
Herein life my claim to all good and only good.
59
41
God goes with me wherever I go.
I am perfect because God goes with me wherever I go.
42
God is my Strength. Vision is His gift.
Let me be willing to exchange my pitiful illusion of seeing for the vision that is given by God.
43
God is my Source.  I cannot see apart from Him.
I can see what God wants me to see.
44
God is the Light in which I see.
God is the only Light.
45
God is the Mind in which I think.
I have no thoughts I do not share with God.
60
46
God is the Love in which I forgive.
The blameless cannot blame, and those who have accepted their innocence see nothing to forgive.
47
God is the Strength in which I trust.
It is through the strength of God in me, which I am remembering as I forgive.
48
There is nothing to fear.
I will recognize in everyone my dearest Friend.
49
God's Voice speak to me all through the day.
I am walking steadily on toward truth.
50
I am sustained by the Love of God.
I remember that I am His Son.