Review III (Lessons 91 – 110)
Review
III
(Lessons 91 – 110)
Unwillingness can be most carefully concealed behind a cloak of situations you can not control.  You are unwilling to cooperate in practicing salvation only if it interferes with goals you hold more dear.
Remember your goal is salvation.
Longer:
5 minutes twice a day first thing in the morning / last thing before I go to sleep at night.
Begin to think about them quietly, letting your mind relate them to your needs, your seeming problems, and all your concerns.
Place the ideas within your mind, and let it use them as it chooses. Give it faith that it will use them wisely, being helped in its decisions by the One Who gave the thoughts to you.  What can you trust but what is in you your mind?
You have been given them in perfect trust, in perfect confidence that you would use them well, in perfect faith that you would understand their messages and use them for yourself.  Offer them to your mind in that same trust and confidence and faith.  It will not fail.
Shorter / Frequently:
1 lesson at the top of the hour / 1 lesson at the bottom of the hour
A
brief
but
serious
review.  Repeat it, and allow your mind to rest a little time in
silence
and in
peace
.
These practice periods are planned to help you form the habit of applying what you learn each day to everything you do.
Response to Temptation:
It's usefulness is limitless to you
.  It is mean to server you in all ways, all times and places, and whenever you need help of any kind.
Regard these practice periods as dedications to the way, the truth and the life.
Confidence → This belongs to me.
Desire → I want this.
Determination –> I will succeed.
#
lesson
suggestions for specific applications
111
91
Miracles are seen in light.
I cannot see in darkness. Let the light Of holiness and truth light up my mind, And let me see the innocence within.
92
Miracles are seen in light, and light and strength are one.
I see through strength, the gift of God to me. My weakness is the dark His gift dispels By giving me His strength to take its place.
112
93
Light and joy and peace abide in me.
I am the home of light and joy and peace.
I welcome them into the home I share,
With God because I am a part of Him.
94
I am as God created me.
I will forever remain as I was,
Created by the Changeless like Himself.
And I am one with Him, and He with me.
113
95
I am as God created me.
Serenity and perfect peace are mind
Because I am One Self, completely whole,
At one with all creations and with God.
96
I am as God created me.
From my One Self, Whose knowledge still remains
Within my mind, I see God's perfect plan
For my salvation perfectly fulfilled.
114
97
I am Spirit.
I am the Son of God. no body can Contain my Spirit nor impose on me A limitation God created not.
98
I will accept my part in God's plan for salvation.
What can my function be but to accept The Word of God, Who has created me, For what I am and will forever be?
115
99
Salvation is my only function here.
My function here is to forgive the world For all the errors I have made. For thus Am I released from them with all the world.
100
My part is essential to God's plan for salvation.
I am essential to the plan of God For the salvation of the world. For He Gave me His plan that I might save the world.
116
101
God's Will for me is perfect happiness.
God’s Will is perfect happiness for me. And I can suffer but from the belief There is another will apart from His.
102
I share God's Will for happiness for me.
I share my Father’s Will for me, His Son. What He has given me is all I want. What He has given me is all there is.
117
103
God being Love, is also happiness.
Let me remember love is happiness And nothing else brings joy. And so I choose To entertain no substitutes for love.
104
I see but what belongs to me in Truth.
Love is my heritage and with it joy. These are the gifts my Father gave to me. I would accept all that is mine in truth.
118
105
God's peace and joy are mine.
Today I will accept God’s peace and joy In glad exchange for all the substitutes Which I have made for happiness and peace.
106
Let me be still and listen to Truth.
Let mine own feeble voice be still, and let Me hear the mighty Voice of truth itself Assure me that I am God’s perfect Son.
119
107
Truth will correct all errors in my mind.
I am mistaken when I think I can Be hurt in any way. I am God’s Son, Whose Self rests safely in the Mind of God.
108
To give and receive are one in Truth.
I will forgive all things today, that I May learn how to accept the truth in me, And come to recognize my sinlessness.
120
109
I rest in God.
I rest in God today and let Him work In me and through me, while I rest in Him In quiet and in perfect certainty.
110
I am as God created me.
I am God’s Son. Today I lay aside All sick illusions of myself and let My Father tell me Who I really am.