There is no order of difficulty
There
is no o
rder
of
diffi
cult
y
(11 instances)
1
:1
-
Pri
nc
i
ples of
Miracles
There is no order of difficulty among miracles. One is not “harder” or “bigger” than another. They are all the same. All expressions of love are maximal.1:1:1
2
:1
- In
troduc
tion
Some miracles may seem to be of greater magnitude than others. But remember the first point in this course—that there is no order of difficulty in miracles. 2:1:16
5:
9 -
The E
xte
rnal Fi
xation
Unless the healer heals himself, he does not believe that there is no order of difficulty in miracles. 5:9:91
6
:5
- The
Only An
swer
To the Holy Spirit, there is no order of difficulty in miracles. This is familiar enough to you by now, but it has not yet become believable. Therefore, you do not understand it and cannot use it. 6:5:63
7
:4
- The U
nif
ied
Curri
culum
We once said there is no order of difficulty in miracles, because they are all maximal expressions of love.  7:4:19
7
:12
-
The
Sta
te of Gra
ce
By demonstrating to yourselves that there is no order of difficulty in miracles, you will convince yourselves that in your natural state there is no difficulty, because it is a state of grace.  7:12:107
10:
7 -
Exp
erience
and Perce
ption
God’s Son is saved. Bring only this awareness to the Sonship, and you will have a part in the redemption as valuable as mine. For your part must be like mine if you learn it of me. If you believe that yours is limited, you are limiting mine. There is no order of difficulty in miracles because all of God’s Sons are of equal value, and their equality is their oneness. 10:7:68
11:
8 - Th
e Gu
ide for
Mir
acle
s
You will recognize that you have learned there is no order of difficulty in miracles when you have applied them to all situations. There is no situation to which miracles do not apply, and by applying them to all situations, you will gain the real world. 11:8:61
14:
6 -
The
Sh
ift
to Mirac
les
The miracle offers exactly the same response to every call for help. It does not judge the call. It merely recognizes what it is and answers accordingly. It does not consider which call is louder or greater or more important. You may wonder how you who are still bound to judgment can be asked to do that which requires no judgment of your own. The answer is very simple. The power of God, and not of you, engenders miracles. The miracle itself is but the witness that you have the power of God in you. That is the reason why the miracle gives equal blessing to all who share in it, and that is also why everyone shares in it. The power of God is limitless. And being always maximal, it offers everything to every call from anyone. There is no order of difficulty here. A call for help is given help.
-> The only judgment involved at all is the Holy Spirit’s one division into two categories—one of love and the other the call for love. 14:6:51-52
19:
5
- The
Obsta
cles to P
eace
To overcome the world is no more difficult than to surmount your little wall. For in the miracle of your relationship, without this barrier, is every miracle contained. There is no order of difficulty in miracles, for they are all the same. Each is a gentle winning over from the appeal of guilt to the appeal of love. How can this fail to be accomplished, wherever it is undertaken? 19:5:44
22:
How
ar
e Healing
and Ato
neme
nt Relat
ed
?
Healing and Atonement are not related; they are identical. There is no order of difficulty in miracles, because there are no degrees of Atonement. It is the one complete concept possible in this world, because it is the source of a wholly unified perception. Partial Atonement is a meaningless idea, just as special areas of hell in Heaven is inconceivable. Accept Atonement, and you are healed. Atonement is the Word of God. Accept His Word, and what remains to make sickness possible? Accept His Word, and every miracle has been accomplished. To forgive is to heal. The teacher of God has taken accepting the Atonement for himself as his only function. What is there, then, he cannot heal? What miracle can be withheld from him? 22:1