PRACTICE INSTRUCTIONS PART II
(Commentary by Dee Doyle & Allen Watson)

Purpose: The introduction to Part II talks as if, in the remaining part of this year, we are trying to reach the end of our spiritual journey: "This year has brought us to eternity" (10:8). However, the Manual, in Section 16 ("How Should the Teacher of God Spend His Day?") implies a more modest goal: to reach a place where we practice because of our own motivation and inspiration, rather than because a book is telling us to. This would transform our practicing from a special assignment into a way of life. Part II of the Workbook, with its absence of daily practice instructions, is an important step in this direction. If here, in the relatively formless landscape of Part II, your practice can blossom, rather than wither, you are close to graduating from the Workbook.

I think we need to combine these two goals: We should aim for eternity, realizing that by aiming high we will carry ourselves farther than if we didn't, even though we may only get as far as weaning ourselves from the Workbook's support. In other words, we should aim to graduate from time and space, so that we can reach the more realistic goal of graduating from the Workbook.

Reading the lesson: The lessons in Part II take a very different form than in Part I. After the day's idea, we find just two paragraphs, both worded in the first person, which expand and comment on the idea. This makes the Part II lessons look much like what we see in most of the reviews, where the idea for the day is followed by a series of "related comments" (W-pI.rI.In.2:3; 3:3) which are worded in the first person and expand on the idea. In the reviews, these related comments become part of the exercises. We read them over several times, we think about them, we repeat them to ourselves, we savor each word. We make them our own, which is why they are worded as if they are our own. We so fully engage them that reading them becomes more like a practice than a simple act of reading.

It makes sense that we should use the comments in the Part II lessons in the same way that we used the comments in the reviews, simply because the two are so similar. And the introduction hints at this. For it speaks of our reading of those paragraphs as an "exercise" (2:1) that is meant to induct us (1:4) into "the periods of wordless, deep experience which should come afterwards" (11:2). Let's look at how we can turn the reading of those two paragraphs into a genuine exercise.

First, the commentary paragraphs (the nonitalicized paragraphs). I recommend that you read these over slowly, perhaps several times, and imagine that these really are your own thoughts (which is how they are worded). To facilitate this, you may want to emphasize words like "I," "me," "my," and "mine."

Second, the prayers. These read as if you yourself are praying them to God, and I recommend doing just that. Fix one sentence at a time in your mind and then close your eyes and say that sentence to God. Try to really mean it and expect Him to hear you. These appear to be designed to carry you into the meditative state, and many of them virtually say that. Lesson 307 says of its prayer, "And with this prayer we enter silently into a state where conflict cannot come" (W-pII.307.2:1). To enhance this effect, you may want to pray the prayer several times.

Morning/evening quiet time: As long as you need for the effect you want.

The longer practice periods are meant to consist of Open Mind Meditation (261). Begin by repeating the idea for the day, but in a special way: as an invitation to God to come to you. "We say the words of invitation that His Voice suggests, and then we wait for Him to come to us" (4:6). After repeating these words, go into a time of expectant, wordless waiting (the word "wait" here occurs six times). To wait normally means to stay physically still in anticipation of some event. Here it means to stay mentally still in anticipation of a wondrous event: the dawning of God on your mind. Wait as if holding your breath for this event. Wait with an attitude that "the memory of God is shimmering across the wide horizons of our minds" (9:5). Your waiting, then, though motionless, should be very much alive. It should be filled with expectancy: "We...expect our Father to reveal Himself, as He has promised" (3:3). The basis for your expectancy, in other words, is your trust that God will keep His promises. He promised to come to you when you asked. You are asking; He will come. Hold this state without the aid of repeating words. However, whenever your mind wanders, you should use words—repeat the idea to draw yourself back to this nonverbal waiting. "We will use that thought...to calm our minds at need" (3:1).

If you find Open Mind Meditation (261) (page 252) either too challenging or too unrewarding, I would recommend using either of the other two methods the Workbook has taught: Down-and-Inward Meditation or Name of God Meditation. In fact, Lesson 222 clearly instructs you to use Name of God Meditation: "Father, we have no words except Your Name upon our lips and in our minds, as we come quietly into Your Presence now" (W-pII.222.2:1).

Hourly remembrance: One or two minutes as the hour strikes (reduce if circumstances don't permit).

Do a miniature version of the morning practice. Repeat the idea as an invitation to God, and then wait in wordless silence for Him to come to you.

Frequent reminder: As often as possible within each hour.

"Repeat [the idea], and allow your mind to rest a little time in silence and in peace" (W-pI.rIII.In.10:5).

Response to temptation: When you are tempted to let upset cause you to forget your goal.

Repeat the idea as a way of calling on God to dispel your upset (see 2:9 and 10:2).

Reading the "What Is" section: Before one of the day's practice periods (not necessarily the morning one), read the relevant "What Is" section. Don't just read it casually. Read it slowly and think about it "a little while" (11:4).
